Well, it's your agenda.
You go ahead, whatever you want.
I really... Texas is one of the great collecting stories of the last 25 years, 30 years, let's say.
I'm going to be writing a lot of Harvard and Yale, but really I think in this book, I'll be writing more about Texas and Boston University to a lesser degree.
I like the groove and the... Gottlieb.
Howard Gottlieb is a very interesting story, isn't he?
And he certainly...
lacks your means, shall we say, to acquire, and I think what he is acquiring really pales, I think, a comparison of what... Well, it's a different kind of collection.
I mean, this is a major league, a big league... Well, it's just a different... It's different.
Well, as early as 1973, there's a piece in the New York Times.
That's the first reference to Harry Ransom in the New York Times index.
What year?
1973.
In fact, I even have a copy of that.
And I would imagine it was their first profile of Harry Ransom.
At that point in 73, he's been doing this for 15 years, I guess.
And they are then comparing this place, this institution, with the collections of Harvard, Yale, the great, the New York Public Library, the really and truly great American collections.
So he did it in 15 years.
Well, and there were differences, of course, in what he was trying to do, and when he did it, and how he did it, and all of these things are what allowed him to do it.
One aspect of it was, of course, money, but there were a lot of reasons why he was successful other than simply that.
The obvious one, of course, was his recognition of 20th century materials.
He realized that, you know, there's a myth that Texas didn't have anything for them, but the history of the play, I mean, if you look at some of the academic bibliographies in the 40s and 30s, I mean, Texas had some very good strings in 19th century materials and 18th century materials, and it was a respectable library.
As he said, it was a good library, and it was a good library, but it wasn't a great library, and he understood what the great library was.
It had a strong base in English literature, and of course the irony was he felt that he could never compete with, well, Yale had the 18th century with the Boswell Babers and Johnson and the like.
But the irony is, long after his death, we acquired the Pforzheimer Collection, which is that cornerstone of English culture, where you have the first editions of every major work.
Of course, you have the corrections, the first edition of Milton, and the corrections in his own room, and things like that.
As I understand it, that collection had been available for quite a while.
Well, available, it was in private hands.
But, I mean, it could have been purchased, shall we say.
It had been for sale for many years.
Yes.
I wonder why, I mean, did Mr. Forsheimer strike that hard?
I want to see if that had a little tougher negotiator, I wonder.
I don't know.
You know, that was 10 years before I got here, and I don't know that it's... Didn't that come down in 86?
No, no, 82.
82.
It might have gotten near in 83 or 84, but I think the deal was struck in 83.
Yeah, you can check that out.
16 million, which is not, in the grand scheme of things, a tremendous amount of money.
I wonder why somebody else didn't... I'm just... I don't know.
This is not a big deal for me.
I'm just curious.
No, I don't know.
I don't know... I imagine a lot of the institutions that could afford it had a great many of those, like folios and the like, and the institutions that didn't have it, probably very few of them could have afforded it or saw that as an important acquisition.
I want to just make sure we're taping.
Go right ahead.
We've come a long way.
I'm reading to Dr. Staley a piece in the New York Times from January 1, 1973.
And what this piece, I guess the springboard for this piece, and it was an overall, since 1958, he has added $45 million worth of papers and books and materials to the center.
This is 1973, though.
$30 million coming from gifts, and the collection has become so significant that most educators and collectors are now rated on the same level
as the research centers at Harvard and Yale University of the Air Public Library in Huntington Library in San Marino, California.
The springboard for this piece is Dr. Ransom's latest major acquisition as a collection of love letters between the 19th century Mexican Emperor Ferdinand Maximilian and his Empress Carlotta.
The letters were sold for $125,000.
Apparently, they were hidden for more than 100 years.
Nobody knew that they were coming on the market.
How Dr. Ransom got the letters widely coveted in Europe
as well as North America, is not exactly clear.
Dr. Ransom is guarded about revealing his methods of knowing when and where rare books and papers will become available.
We learned that the Belgian royal family was about to release the letters, and an alumnus got an option, as Dr. Ransom's explanation.
The existence of these letters is not commonly known.
Apparently, as Dr. Ransom's direct approach appears to have endeared him to many sources on the University of Texas, his lending collections that other universities thought were theirs,
And then it's a little more background.
Where is the... How Dr. Violet read that to you?
I guess he, I wouldn't say made enemies, but he upset a lot of people in the traditional institutions.
I guess he had a pretty aggressive policy of acquisition.
He has a... Well, go ahead.
Maybe we can just pick it up there.
I think where he really saw this was in auction.
And Lansing thought that a successful auction was at 85, 100 percent of all of the material that would come up under the gavel.
And most people at auction were satisfied with 15 or 20, or targeted particular items.
Lansing frequently watched
and did that extremely well.
You obviously weren't here then, so you can't really speak to the mandate.
My encounter, of course, I was, as provost in the University of Tulsa, we were very active in the modern market, and we had bought the Cyril Conley collection, we bought the Paul Scott, we bought the Rebecca West, and had bought a group of
late 20th century women writers, which now I regret terribly that Texas didn't get them instead of Tulsa.
But those were interesting years, too.
The point I'm making is there were a number of institutions that I'm coming to detail into the story instead of the beginning of it, but competition became much keener because Ransom established a kind of pattern for collecting.
The four or five things that Ransom did that are important
First, of course, is his recognition of 20th century materials.
The second was his recognition of pretextual materials, the abop texts, the notebooks, the diaries, the chapbooks, all of the pre-publication materials.
Of course, if you were collecting in the Renaissance in the 18th century, most of this material wouldn't be available anyway.
It was in the 20th century where large quantities of it were available.
Ransom was very quick to note that the pre-publication materials were of great value.
Not just the letters, which always have had value, but this was the diaries, notebooks, all those kinds of things.
The idea that the text doesn't begin with the first edition.
That's right.
The text, in one sense, ends with the first edition, doesn't it?
And the study of the imagination, it's important to see the whole evolution of it.
And that was an extremely important move.
That's where the whole idea of archives and manuscripts became so important to Manson.
With particular focus on the 20th century.
Of course.
Of course, because that's what was available.
It wasn't that he had any strong predisposition to the moderns.
Manson's own field was in rhetoric, copyright law, and taught a wide range of subjects when he was an English professor.
It's that this is where it was.
This is what was available.
This is what you could acquire.
And he recognized that the 20th century materials were the ones that were going to be studied.
Now, those are important elements in recognizing what he did.
The other thing that, because he was able to acquire such large numbers of things,
he became clearly aware of networking.
You know, you get the papers of so-and-so, but you get the other side of the correspondence here, and both correspondences list party, another party, and then you would get those.
And so, before you know it, for example, with Bloomsbury, you've got the network of all kinds of correspondence, where you can recreate and study in all kinds of ways literary history, and the relationships of authors, the relationship of author culture, and these became extremely important components of what
the Ransom collections are about.
I don't know of many places where you can reconstruct so much historically with primary evidence because of all of these interrelationships and connections.
The Ransom collection and the art collections are enormously, the great strength of them is in 20th century British.
Now there's strength in 20th century American and major international strength in 20th century French literature.
I don't know that any place
in America would be as strong as we were in 20th century French literature.
But, uh... It's largely related to that.
Yes, largely, yes.
The other, the other point, although we were not as broadly strong in 20th century America, we're extremely strong in the 20th century American drama.
We have the papers of Lillian Hellman, Tennessee Williams, Arthur Miller, a lot of Inge.
So, except for O'Neill, you have the great
the notable exception of William.
Yes.
Now, Dr. Miller is living.
Sure.
Now, did he give these to the university, or were these purchased?
Some were given, and then, of course, remember, these were in the days of tax, and some, a lot of it is loan.
Really?
I mean, permanent loan, yeah.
Now, does Mr. Miller come down here?
He has, yes.
In fact, I invited him down about last September or October.
We wanted his wife, who's a remarkable photographer,
and we wanted to have a show of her work.
I collect Miller.
Oh, you're good.
She wrote the preface, of course, to her last night collection.
We have a great photography collection here.
I understand it's majoring there.
Well, I don't know.
I mean, of course, Eastman is stronger, but we have five million photographs, including the world's first.
It's a remarkable collection.
Now, when you say you have five million photographs, does that mean that you have the negative?
Either that or the image, one or the other.
But to say you possess the photograph implies that, I'm new at this figure, implies that you have the negative.
Not necessarily.
If you have a signed image, that's a photograph.
That's a photograph.
You said there were about five things that ran some of the records.
Yeah, the fact that it was 20th century number one, two, that he collected the pretexts,
and the pretextual material.
Three, that he was able to network and draw a connection to these people.
A fourth area was why Ransom, one reason why Ransom was so successful was, is because nobody had any real idea of the market.
I mean, people said, well, gee, he's paying too much for those things.
He's pretty much established.
Well, yeah, you're paying too much for an odd manuscripts of $1,400, well,
In 62, you might have been.
Now you pay 60, 80, 100,000.
I'm sure some people thought Rosenbach paid too much when he paid $1,600 for your listings.
Yeah.
So this was always the question, you know, I think the important part and the fifth point that I would make is ransom went against expectations.
People felt, British press especially, felt that the direction that a behemoth like Texas would go, and as the most private collectors who were getting into this, people had a lot of money to pursue folios.
Let's get a pretty Shakespeare folio, because that's kind of the cornerstone of the culture, or let's get a this or a that.
And that's what the British press would expect from a, you know, a gauche Texan out here in the primitive parts of the world.
And instead, he went into an area that they didn't even know that they never did much with, up until Phil Blarkin, who was a librarian at Hull and, of course, a great poet, who talked about a national archive.
and some of the schemes that the British worked, which were very good.
The regional libraries were able to purchase papers, and there were some grants for them to do that.
But up until that time, they was ready to have that done.
You did get a Guggenberg Bible, however.
Yeah, that's late, though.
That's later, yeah.
Much later.
But that, you talk about getting a monument, that is the monument.
Yes.
The monument of Texas.
But Ransom was, was he in line with that?
I think he was dead.
Oh, sure.
No, I think that was 82.
You know, I might have these dates of the Pforzheimer, uh, 85 and then the, and the, and the, and the Gutenberg.
I am a New York Times that was at 86, I think.
The Gutenberg?
The Pforzheimer.
It could be.
It could be, but the negotiations were earlier than that.
Yeah.
Well, then maybe it was the Gutenberg that was 82.
I think the Gutenberg of Gutenberg.
They got from the Pforzheimers, too.
Yeah.
So that's probably the dates, yeah.
His nephew, by the way, is quite a collective Pforzheimer.
He's a charter member of the CIA, and he has the finest collection of intelligence anywhere.
In fact, we're going to see him in Washington.
I guess, also, one thing you didn't mention, or if you did, I missed it, he also decided to put living, which is a departure, isn't it?
Absolutely.
And I think this is where, see, I'm asking you to speculate, and
go back on things you weren't here, so that's not scary to you.
No, but I mean, I know the market.
But on the other hand, you have picked up... Sure.
Yeah, the fact that he bought things directly from writers, this was something new, or relatively new, at least.
from an institutional point of view.
Now, did he identify the writers who were important or who were going to be important?
This is something that you're doing now.
I read some books where you have a list, a short list of writers you could go back to.
No, I don't think that you could say that there was anything done that was systematic at this time, at the time of Ransom.
Ransom is not systematic in this.
You know, no business, I mean, every business, every kind of
institutional aspect of something has a rhythm.
And I think the rhythm of the Ransom Center is not unlike the pattern of libraries everywhere.
And the first thing you do, you've got to sew.
You've got to buy.
And I remember the story someone told of somebody that said, you know, we really have to catalog this grand green material.
There's somebody writing a book, and I know we've got that here, but we can't find it.
He said, Dr. Ransom, couldn't you leave some money aside for cataloging?
And Ransom looked at him and said, I understand what you're saying.
He said, not now.
this was the time to get it before the others started.
I would like, and I guess I've already asked to talk to Alex Strip in his writing of I'm Told a Biography.
Yes.
I really would like to capture some of the flavor.
There must be these incredible exciting times here.
People, as I say in this talk that I gave, I mean, one of the great things about Ransom is the story of the guy who walked in to see Ransom told his, said, you know, I've got a terrible, I've got a terrible faculty situation, I need
He said, I've got a mean dean.
I need travel funds to go to a meeting so I can give a paper and all this.
Ransom talked with him and left the office.
He went home that night.
Ransom just had him on his shoulder and everything.
He went home and took his wife out there and said, Isn't it wonderful to be here?
Nothing was resolved.
Nothing was done.
But Ransom could, in a very short time, elevate expectations.
That got dangerous, too.
I saw a phrase of yours someplace, the myth of Harry.
The myth of Harry Ransom.
What is the myth of Harry Ransom?
Well, sometimes it dissolves as you look at it carefully.
I think the reason it's a myth is because you can get 30 people to talk about Ransom, and what they thought was Ransom's real mission and purpose and everything, and it's amazing how various it can be.
For example, one thing that isn't really thought of as Ransom is that
One of his primary purposes was to build a great undergraduate library, a great general library.
When he went in and bought these collections, he said, why did you buy that?
Ransom said, he said there was a small black university down in Tennessee, down in the south of the state, that needed a library.
He said, sure, we'll get the plums out of it, but it's going down there.
They need books.
They just need books.
To you or to me, it looked like just a fair, average, or even poor collection.
But to those people who have no books, it's important.
You mean he would buy a library, call what he wanted?
Well, potentially call, yeah, and send the books to where they're needed.
And this is when he was chancellor.
He had all these different institutions under his orbit.
He said, Tennessee, did you mean Texas?
Lower Texas, yeah.
The other sense of ransom that you have to keep in mind and you have to recognize is
And that is that unique role that research libraries play in the culture.
And the affinity in the nexus with departments and graduate studies, as those things are institutionalized.
And I think not to recognize that is not to recognize one of the great fabrics of all of this.
Let me explain that.
The first point is, in the 60s, if you recall,
all of these institutions across America were exploding with a post-war, becoming doctoral programs.
There was Southern Illinois, Illinois State, California was building six other places besides UCLA.
Everyone was trying to have a graduate program.
The NDEA, Title IV was out, funding graduate programs.
All of these things were emerging and developing.
There was a tremendous demand to
have research materials, and that was one's linked with respectability.
Besides that, after World War II, the tremendous dominance of new criticism as a method.
New criticism had important implications of the text again.
One, it also established its own canon, what were the writers to be studied.
It made important and it made respectable the study of modern literature.
It also looked at the pretexts and preliminaries of the text.
It was not a kind of bellatristic literary history that focused him.
This development lent itself absolutely naturally to the study of literature in a place like this.
So there were a number of parallel movements which had important cultural
extremely important cultural implications.
The whole business of the academy, as it were, moved in these kinds of directions and were appropriate for Ransom's parallel and appropriate to what Ransom was doing.
The literature itself helped to form the canon.
See, it was respectable.
Students weren't even examined in 20th century literature until the 50s.
And the first dissertation on Joyce was done at Harvard very early, but the next one was 20 years later.
The first academic book on Joyce was 1941 by Harry Levin.
So, I mean, you had this catch-up.
Of course, it wasn't published in America until 1934.
1934, The Woolsey Decision, right.
So you have a lot of things kind of concatenating and coming together.
that made so much of what Ransom did move with the flow of the intellectual life and the humanities.
And I think that's an extremely important factor because it's what gives it, it certainly is what has given it its life flow, its move.
It's become institutionalized.
Had Ransom done all this and these things just sat here, it wouldn't even be a story.
See, Joyce is perfect for you, isn't it?
I think that you're kind of embracing this philosophy.
It's a philosophy I embrace, but for you to be a scholar enjoys, I think it's really appropriate, because modern literature starts.
Well, it's certainly very much there.
Very much there.
Let me just read you a quote from the Times, because it is pertinent to what you're saying.
As fast as material arrives and is arranged, it is open for study to undergraduates as well as to scholars.
Dr. Anthony said it before and that's in the record.
Adding that it had never occurred to the center to restrict use of the Texas collections to local students and scholars.
Right.
Final quote.
I love this.
I don't use this quote.
Collecting is an empty vanity unless it's useful.
That's right.
And a wonderful quote.
You might say, we don't collect treasures, we collect research material.
If I could put it that way.
Yeah.
And you do have some treasures.
But...
You certainly paid king's ransom prices for some of them.
Yeah, absolutely.
But I think that the trust is clearly now research materials, which isn't to say that it isn't important to have those great cultural artifacts of the centuries.
Sure, they are.
And I'm not saying that we wouldn't buy something else.
But mainly what we're doing is research materials.
Now, he had, I guess from the state, a commitment for a million dollars a year to buy a million dollars a year.
It's never clear how much he had.
I guess he had a million dollars.
But of course, he frequently had more.
And he had donors.
Yeah, I mean, he had a million, I guess, from the state.
But clearly, he got much more from benefactors.
Absolutely.
If there is a phase one, phase one would be to cast a wide net and gather.
That's right.
Gather.
And he was a gatherer.
He was a gatherer.
And I don't know if we can quantify it by phases, but what phase would you see yourself?
I think our phase is clearly moving into a much clearer definition of what we are as a research center.
That's clearly one.
Second is to make available in the finest possible way the collections that are here.
And that means fuller cataloging, automation, and it means a research link where we define collections, provides finding lists, provides scholarly guides and aids, establish research agenda, have publication projects of our own material.
In other words,
you begin to see the Manson Center more and more closely defining itself as a research center, and with all of what that implies.
Okay.
This apparently will be recognized if you're going to study 20th century, British, French, American, I guess, and other related, but those are the three primaries, or any number of other areas in the first century.
You have to come here.
But we're also conscious of the fact that in 2020, when we look back on this, I don't want it to be said that we were essentially a great collection for the first half of the 20s.
That's right.
20 years to run.
We have, as you get to that kind of that point, that peak, that from the 90s, you're looking ahead to the decade, that
is essentially going to be looking backward.
And we are going to be very, we have programs now that concentrate on post-1950 writers and this sort of thing.
What specifically are you doing to continue the acquisitions?
Specifically, we have, let's give you an example of the kind of thing we do.
It's a full computer print ad.
Is this something I can get?
No, this is just a, first of all, it's a movable piece.
It changes every week or ten days.
But we have writers, and we have about 1,400 writers.
And of those writers, we then set them up in various categories.
Collection evaluation.
Writers are ranked.
Now, they're not ranked simply, yeah, a lot of dealers in the world would, too, as you can imagine, and we have to be sensitive to that, but the important thing, Edward Abbey, born in 1927, it's alphabetical, but we rank these writers one through five, as you can see the different numbers here, but it is not simply on some kind of literary evaluation that we make it.
I mean, for example, Edward Albee is rated four, which might
which is a very high rating on our list, but we also have manuscripts, as you see here, of Albie.
James Baldwin.
Your highest rating is?
It was five.
It was Baldwin, five.
Okay.
Martin Bell would be high, a British poet.
Uh-huh.
Isn't this wonderful?
I don't know if it goes through... How about John Bunga, where he's got his book?
It doesn't matter.
All that's represented here means that their first work was published after... What this means is their first work was published after 1950.
Who prepares this list?
We have our research staff that works on it, but we also consult with the dealers.
We watch catalogs to see who's... We also have a faculty committee.
that looks at this list and works with him.
Now, William Graham, unfamiliar to me.
William Graham is a five.
Why is that?
We have, we feel he's an important figure and knew a great many people, had rich correspondence with him and other people, and we already have a good one.
Kerouac's five, too.
I'm a Lowell native, so Jack Kerouac's from Old Man.
Yes, he sure is.
You have a number of Kerouac things, I guess.
Quite a bit, yes.
Now, you would see Robert Lowe is not on here because his first work was published before 1950.
Bill Kennedy, I would expect to be higher than a three.
Well, but you don't know what a three means.
What does it mean?
See, the first level is representative works, mint copies, representative works.
Second level is more than representative works, but an option to get all copies of each thing that comes out.
The third is representative words plus secondary material that's published also with a look toward manuscript material.
If it's available, exciting.
So a four might be on here because we don't think that four is nearly as good a writer as a two, but we know that someone else already has the manuscript material, so there's no sense in us trying to get anything complete because, I mean, we're glad that someone else is doing it.
And I mentioned Kennedy.
clearly all of this stuff is going to stay in Albany.
Yes.
So the reason why I'm very lucky to show that kind of thing is that it is not necessarily some hierarchy.
Then within this list, we also narrow it down to key writers that were very active in the acquisitions of the material.
And that's a list that we're definitely, you know, put out to the world because every book here will be out there.
No, we keep
pretty much to ourselves but on the other hand people uh know where we are i mean everyone knows what hectic is doing sure here's one of the great uh this is what you'll see this is a picture for you there they are there's that's the the hierarchy of the book world in the 60s can you identify them for me left to right uh jake zeitland jake zeitland is famous drake
The Lady of Barker, Hamill and Barker in Chicago, Bertram Rhoda, famous Margie Cohen, and Lou Feldman of Haskell Viette, and Franklin Gillum.
Franklin's the only one alive now.
This is Lou Feldman here.
Lou Feldman, I guess, was the exclusive agent for... Not exclusive.
He did a lot of the...
I've heard a lot of things about Lou Feltman, you know.
Everybody says, why?
What was the maker of Lou Feltman?
Oh, I'd love for you to do that.
Well, it's a simple one.
It takes, again, it takes... Feltman had capital.
Feltman had capital.
Feltman could hold this stuff for 90 days or 120 days.
Dealers couldn't do that.
Or longer.
He could hold longer.
Longer.
I understand that he actually held stuff for over a year.
He could well have.
I mean, I just haven't studied the dates and times, but I know he could hold them.
Some of it was it, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, he could have held, some things were probably held longer.
I mean, there were so many things going on then, it's hard to know whether you were paying for this then or that then.
But this is one of the ways you make the omelet, I guess.
That's right.
You know, there's a great joke.
There was a great joke in the book world.
He said, you know, a book dealer could only afford to have two good customers, especially if one of them was Texas.
I've read a hundred new books.
Sure you have.
But everybody says, but you've got to go to Texas and ask down there.
And I said, well, what do I ask?
Well, the other great one was Jake Schwartz, of course.
I don't know if you heard stories about Jake Schwartz.
I don't know how it'll come out.
Jake Schwartz was...
He brought the Hanley collection.
Yes.
Am I right?
Yeah.
The Hanley story, I was telling Connie about it on the airplane yesterday.
It's fantastic.
It's a great story.
Where would I get something on that, you know?
You know, you had that thing when Ransom, at the celebration down here, Ransom State.
I mean, I'll have to get you that.
Oh, right.
Yeah, yeah.
Hanley was from Bradford, Pennsylvania.
Bradford, Pennsylvania.
His widow was still alive.
She was a ballet dancer.
She's still alive?
Yeah, she was a tool that was still alive.
She sent me a lovely, I think it was a Rupert Brooke or a Rudyard Kipling item the other day.
I mean, do you know the history of, how did this man collect such extraordinary things?
I mean, was Tula part of the collection, do you think?
She came a little later.
She's a belly dancer.
She wrote a book.
Well, and her sister moved in with him, too.
They lived in a house that the insurance company would not... Finally wouldn't insure.
They wouldn't insure the stuff.
There had been paintings hanging in the bathroom.
And, of course, he was such a collector that he'd fill the house and...
and then sell it off, and then start all over again, and end up with more than he had the first time.
You see, that's a syndrome, by the way.
You know, Jerome Curran did that.
Thomas Jefferson did that to a degree.
Thomas Jefferson built three great libraries.
The Library of Congress, the University of Virginia, and then another one after.
I mean, he just took on.
Sure, it is.
Oh, it's a... Jerome Curran, you know, the great... It's fascinating, too, to watch the relationship between the book trade, the private collector, and institutional buying.
It's fascinating to watch how that has moved through the 20th century.
It's tri-par.
And now you've seen where the book for the 60s and 70s, that the private collector moved away from it, moved out of it as a major player, and drifted.
And then, of course, it changed, and now the private collector has moved back in, and it's very, very powerful.
Did I send you the piece where I quote David Reddy himself, who says,
He believes we're in the middle of another great golden age of collecting.
He hopes so.
And he said, if you have a hundred million dollars, and I laughed.
Yeah.
And he said, don't laugh just yet.
He said, if you have a hundred million dollars, you could build one of the finest private libraries in the world.
Yeah.
Because the stuff is available.
And if you were in painting, you'd maybe get three.
Yeah, well, then that's what he said.
And when I laughed, he said, don't laugh.
He said, I sit in a place where people spend fifty million dollars for one
Masterpiece.
The night before, the evening before the Garden Limited sale, which I attended, a Japanese collector paid $22 million worth of kooning.
This is a living artist, not an actor.
I'm not a living artist.
His reputation still has to be assessed, I guess, or maybe perhaps is secure.
But the whole garden collection, including portfolios of Shakespeare... Well, it's the thing to keep it on.
We talked about knowledge transfer and all of the public, about how quick knowledge moves and everything, and the technology that's associated with it.
Well, one aspect of the 20th century is the solidification of reputations.
I mean, I think when the three of us can sit in this room today and say it's really safe to say that Joyce, Eliot, Faulkner, Proust,
are the figures of the 20th century.
I don't know if in 1890 we could have said that about Keats.
I mean, just if you take this... The greatest poet of one of the left.
Yeah, right.
I mean, I don't know that you could say that.
Of course, he was a short life and all of that.
But what I mean is the so-called kind of canon of literature.
This century has seen a pattern of solidification that I don't think there was ever...
just by sheer knowledge and information exchange.
Let me just finish this Golden Age thing, Bob.
I threw that same thing to Ed Wolf in Philadelphia.
And he said, I don't agree with that.
He said, a lot of great stuff is available.
He said, but can anybody buy a full run of Shakespeare photos for any price?
They're not available.
He said, we at the library company in Philadelphia do not have a complete run of poor Richard's Almanac.
And I'd like to know where one is so we can get one.
In other words, the money might be there, some people might be selling, but you do not have the extraordinary ability.
Well, plus, we're dealing with unique items.
And so it's not a, I mean, you know, if there's a, see, that's where we have a real problem.
I mean, you know, you see a book in a catalog and you say, well, you know, it's a really limited edition, maybe 80 copies, 30.
That's one thing.
But when you see a D. H. Lawrence manuscript, you know, how many times do you get a shot at it?
Well, Metamorphosis, Costa's Metamorphosis went for two mil, two million.
If that's, that's a seminal manuscript, of course it is.
Sure, but if that's two million, what is Ulysses' worth on the open market?
Absolutely.
And would you be there swinging?
You know, I'll tell you.
Let me do a hypothetical.
Well, I'll answer that question of where we would be and where we wouldn't be.
It's not about to happen, number one.
It's not.
We know where it is.
We know that that manuscript, we would measure it in terms of what we had of Joyce, where it wasn't its research value.
There are a lot of manuscripts that we don't even touch.
I mean, there's a stack.
I was gone four days.
There's a stack of probably 13 authors in here of Catherine Ann Porter, D.H.
Lawrence, James Agee, so-and-so.
There's some of those we'll look at very carefully.
There's some that we won't even bother.
We'll just thank them.
Because all of Catherine Ann Porter's material, for example, was at Maryland.
What good is it, really, from the point of view of helping the research, for us to have 19 letters of Catherine Ann Porter's here, if that's all we've got?
We do not find.
Now, the Lilly, which is one of the great libraries, has built their great collections on a different principle, really.
I mean, they've gotten representative things, and they've done that very, very carefully, representative aspects of the library.
writers in certain points.
They maintain a list, short list.
Do they?
Yeah.
That's the first time I saw that, when we put out a book.
We're going up there at some point.
Good.
We already talked to Kegel.
Kegel's a good man.
And do you know Matheson?
I don't.
Matheson's important.
Building 20th Century Collections.
Do you know that article?
It's an important article.
No, I don't.
Matheson, where was that?
He was the chief head of rare books at Library of Congress.
He's retired now.
But his article appeared in what is called the RBMS.
Are you going to see Sally Leach on your schedule?
Ask her about that.
She's been here for quite a while.
Yeah, she'll be very good.
She'll be right here.
She'll be much more useful than I about the stages of development, as an institution especially.
She's very good.
She's got a good memory.
She's my historical link.
Was this done from life, by the way, this choice?
No, this is Milton Hebel.
He's the poet who did the death mass.
And he, I mean, he's the one who did the grave in Zurich.
By the way, incidentally, everything in here is mine.
I mean, that's a rule I have.
No book from the HRC goes, comes in here.
But there's nothing wrong with that, is there?
I mean, I've been to any number of, any number of repositories where... Well, but the difference, I don't know the difference, but my difference is this is a working library, and I've...
You know, I teach a seminar on Joy's on Wednesdays, and I'm writing on Joy's.
We edit a journal on Joy's.
So this is very much a working library.
So you are a collector?
Well, there it is.
That's all the Slocum A's.
That's the Slocum A's.
Wow.
Plus Curiosities.
Where is the Shakespeare and Company?
It's in the blue volume.
I'll show it to you in a minute.
Those are all the translations.
The German, the French, the Japanese, the Danish, the Swedish.
Many of them signed by the translators.
Then I have Joyce's copy of Portrait.
You know, Sylvie B. sent him two copies when he was in Zurich, so here they are.
I have one of those.
But then you can get into really unusual things as a collector with Joyce, as you might imagine.
How long have you been collecting, Doctor?
Since I was a kid.
We might want to talk a little bit about his own personal collection, you know, wouldn't you think?
Now, here's the kind of thing that you ask.
Joyce was, as you know, had severe odds growth.
Very.
And he was in London.
They wanted him to do a recording of I.A.
Richards in Ogden, as is the Orthodox Society, where we can talk about moral interpretations and all that.
They wanted him to leave for Matt Olivia Plurville.
the section in the wake.
Well, he's in the blind, and he remembered a lot of it.
So what did they do?
They posted it on ten boards.
Oh, wow.
And these are the boards, so he could read from them.
You see, Chris, this is deteriorated because of the paper that they used at that time.
This predates the stuff they do on television.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And the prompt is.
So this is the kind of mania that you get into, Joyce, you know.
but this is something that these are this is a text from which joyce read we know that we have the recording of it so these are the kinds of things that you got the regular or oh yeah yeah when the when the orthognographical institute in organ was uh clearing out and everything i'd have to pick that up do you have a little biographical board that i'll be able on yourself that i'll be able to uh have oh sure but i'll show you a couple other items before i forget
This is the, uh, this is the, uh, the Joyce.
There are three or four good, really, Joyce collections still in private hands.
One's Ronnie Zurbicki in Michigan.
Uh, how do you spell his name?
Uh, it's, uh, DZ, DZ, the, I have got it in there.
That's all right.
Okay.
There's the one of 28 of the Buenos Aires edition.
Oh, boy.
Here's, of course, the, uh, the, uh,
This is it.
Yeah, this is the first to shape the income.
It's a good condition, number.
But, you know, it's very hard to find it.
But it's good.
It's in good shape.
I understand the University has, what, 40 of these or 41?
It's 12, I don't know.
One of the hundreds.
Yeah.
But, you know.
Talk to me a little bit about that.
Yeah.
How would you do that?
It's gilding a lily.
We've got another one.
Why?
Because we've got a collection out of Paris.
We ran it out on Ascension Thursday.
You've got the whole thing right on it.
There was one in there.
Plus there were papers, but you have that Joyce manuscript that says, is there anything left?
We found the missing range in the Philippines Lake Stemma.
Got it here.
This is a little bit out of Paris in March.
Is this something that I'll be able to get?
Is this something... No one knows it yet.
You can get... Where is your book coming out?
A year, a year and a half.
Yeah, well, you can get it after May.
After May?
Yeah.
Who do I call and ask about?
Who do I call?
You call me.
And ask and ask you, what will be the key word?
I'll give you the whole thing.
I'll tell you the whole collection that we got.
It's major.
So, you see, this is what you're doing.
This goes back to the, oh yeah, this is what you're doing.
It's one of the last, it's probably the last great George collection.
That's exciting.
I want it as contemporaries.
So, yes, that's what we do.
These are, of course, you know, this is the important Odyssey Press edition.
This is the first Spanish translation that was published in Mexico.
These, of course, are all the different editions.
There's the one with the Eric Gilbo.
first indies regular the bodily head with eric gills this of course look at my piece i didn't realize my piece did that yes it was signed by matisse yeah it is that's the old limited edition ugly book spines loose on it yeah you never see it in good shape it's not an attractive book well yeah there's one of you nevertheless nevertheless here's one you appreciate oh chinese this is the first japanese but here's one you also appreciate
This is appropriate.
The first Gaelic.
Imagine taking Ulysses back to Gaelic.
This is all Ulysses.
What don't you have?
Here's Klumczynski's, the famous Polish translation.
He's the James Bond of Poland.
Ian Fleming.
Yeah.
He's going to be in my book, Ian Fleming.
He's a great book collector.
Oh, he was, yeah.
This stuff went to Lily.
There's the check.
edition.
You know exactly where everything is.
You notice he knows where everything is.
There's one of the French trade.
Here's the Romanian.
We've got them all here.
And these are kind of special editions, you know, the fancier editions, limited.
Then I collected this.
This is the Ulysses, but I also have the one with the, when they did the play, the film.
Ulysses.
That's the same Gil.
That's the bow, yeah.
Now these are all the...
things where his earlier work appeared.
How long did it take you to put this collection together?
Oh, I've been collecting for 20, 30 years.
But, you know, off and on.
That's the first Portuguese done in Brazil.
Here's the Finnegan's Lake.
Now, that's your first American over there.
Right?
This one here?
Isn't that the Random House edition?
This here?
Yeah, right there.
You should have one with a better dust jacket than that.
I have one.
Isn't that amazing?
And I take nothing for it.
Well, you're lucky.
See, these are very early...
Here, of course, is the... Here's the first two essays.
Oh, isn't that wonderful?
There's the two essays.
The Day of the Ravelment.
There it is.
Day of the Ravelment.
Do you like a little... Look at this one, Colin.
It must be Japanese or Chinese one.
I don't know the difference.
Look at this.
In January 1898,
Belvedere College Theatrical Entertainment.
And what do we have here?
We have the Gymnastic Theatrical Entertainment on January 10th and 11th in 1898.
And who do we have playing Mr. Grimstone?
James A. Joyce.
This is what we call ephemera.
Ephemera, but boy.
Ephemera, ephemera, ephemera.
Then these are, you even get into... What don't you have that you'd like to have, though?
We do the Prokosh forgeries.
These are the second edition.
These are all the different editions of chamber music.
Then there's, of course, Ibsen's New Drama.
And then here, you give this a special box because you have... These are the three chamber music.
I had the box made to get them.
All three of them.
That's the seven of the box, by the way.
And it's well worth the investment.
And then, of course, you keep records.
There are other Joyce items that you would be...
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 15.
Now, why do you have those two press release photographs?
There's one of Graham Greene I can see up there.
These are either people that I signed them.
There's David Plank, and those are different writers that I got them at the time I was with them or to that effect.
Here's something we enjoy.
You don't see this a lot.
There's the Holy Office, and that's in mint with the eagle.
If you look up there, you'll see the eagle.
Oh, look at that.
Watermark.
It's very hard to get that.
I bought that in 1963.
When did he stop using the middle initial?
Or did he always use it?
When he signed things, he signed James A. Forrest.
Did he?
Yeah.
There's Lucia's ABC Chats that I haven't told.
And then these are some of the very small limited editions of things that came out in Paris.
It never fails to excite you, I can say.
Those are all the different exiles.
This is the interesting thing.
McCosh's bookstore in Minneapolis, St.
Paul, did a facsimile of that two essays that you saw, and reprinted it, and without anything painting in 1957.
That book, it was very expensive in 1957.
It was a $17 book, and then they, now they, that book's about a $150 book.
It just was a... Yeah, really active.
And then you get into association things.
See, this is the kind of thing that you... This is also a scholar's library.
This is a book that was in Joyce's library, from the library of James A. Joyce, another book of the way, Sex Mythology, Including an Account of the Masculine Cross.
This becomes very interesting.
It deals with transmutation of sexual symbols and rituals from the original object.
You begin to see what Joyce did with Finnegan's Wake, with Anna Lydia.
It's a source book.
This is a major library.
It's a major collection here.
We're looking at a very major collection.
Oh yeah, it's one of the big ones.
What don't you have that you still have?
I do not have the limited editions Ulysses signed with Joy.
Matisse signed all of them.
Joyce thought they were so ugly he got tired of signing and quit after about 80 or 90.
I've run it down.
It's always been about $300 or $400 more than I was willing to pay for it.
And I don't like the book, so that's one that I haven't kept up with.
The translations are very strong.
That's one of the really strong things in the book.
You can see all the Doverner's translations and the like.
All that's Joyce material, by the way.
And then, of course, this is secondary.
This is all Joyce.
This is the so-called industry of James Joyce.
I just did this.
This is just to annotate.
That's a bibliography of your collection?
Bibliography of the Important Studies on Joyce.
These are my books on Joyce here.
But this is all alphabetical.
There's the Garland Archive of Joyce.
This is, these are his books.
Yeah, that I've written, yeah.
And that's his bibliography, and edited by this plus, that's a Simon Schuster one.
Yeah, it's Simon Schuster in England and St.
Martin's here, and you know how it seems to go.
This is a good book, this John Quinn book.
Yes, it's a wonderful book.
John Quinn is one of my subjects.
One thing that you should read is in the Nora biography, you know that last chapter.
Brenda Maddox's book.
On the slogan books.
How Slocum started collecting joys and everything.
That's wonderful.
This, of course, is the pre-copy of the chapter that had to be excised in the edition.
Well, I didn't know one.
Yeah.
What chapter had to be excised?
Did we run into a problem here?
We reviewed the book, of course.
I know, but I should have had one of those.
When you review it, there's a letter.
Oh, it's in my other copy, and the kids have it down here.
We're working on some letters, but...
They sent a letter on saying, through an agreement with Stephen Joyce, Ms.
Maddox has agreed to excise this chapter.
So would you please destroy this one?
Well, you can see I destroyed it.
This is the chapter that, uh, called Norris, I guess it isn't, and it's not in the book.
That's the Hoden, that one.
Yeah, that's the Hoden, that one edition.
This, of course, is 1904, which you have to have.
This is the, uh,
the Thom's directory that Joyce used when he was in Trieste.
There's some other things there, but these are the... That's the T-O... Thomas... T-H-O-M, apostrophe, yes, official directory, 1904, and that's the official directory of... Dublin.
Of Dublin.
See, that's how he did all the streets and names.
And so he used that book.
How did he get the names?
The streets of who lived where?
Yeah.
of every priest that he used in the book.
Where did you get this?
I got it out of Dublin.
You got two of them.
Dublin was the earliest city to get electrified transportation now, in spite of its being backward and many other ways.
And this one doesn't have all the electrical maps and the tram.
That's a nice little detail.
Oh, yeah.
And then this section is just as they come in.
These are all new.
I have to get them
catalog, and I write an annual piece on that sort of thing.
What do you, I mean, if you could give it to me in a paragraph, what kind of stimulation do you get from Trace?
Obviously, this is, you're a scholar, but you're also a collector.
Oh, yeah.
And I've been watching you for the last 15 minutes.
I mean, you have been really energized by this collection.
Well, yeah, this is the, obviously, you know, you have a professional interest in it, but you're also
The collector who you begin, you can always tell a collector who's the most genteel when they see something that they don't have.
The signs of avariciousness immediately come to the eyes and the pupils dilate.
No, I mean, that's all part of it, isn't it?
And one collects and one follows the system.
I mean, there are marvelous examples of all kinds of things.
For example, this is this concordance of Douglass.
Here's the size of Dubliners, and here's the conclusion.
This is a testament to German scholarship.
I mean, I wish I could read German.
I've seen so many books referenced at the Widener Library that are... Here's how I print my own copies of the Dubliners.
See?
Well, but you see, what I do is,
So these are your annotations.
I have an interleaved page.
Ah.
So if I want to make notes.
But you see, I have to do that every so often because... I'll show you.
See, mine get a little bit... It was the earlier edition.
And I can throw all these notes away.
and start all over.
You're building an archive as well.
Do you agree with the discrediting of this edition?
Well, as they said in the New York Times, in the New York Review, Kidd claimed that I had endorsed it by keeping it in the Joyce establishment, and my letter vehemently denied that.
I think that the test of it needs to be by sexual scholars, not Joyce scholars.
We're like Richard Ellman, in the sense that Ellman says to Goblin in a letter, he says that, I know that there's no textual evidence that Joyce left this in the manuscript, but it just feels right.
Well, if you feel it or I feel it, it doesn't matter.
I mean, you've lost the technical.
So these are questions that are going to have to be decided, and this is where they're decided, of course, right here.
These are the papers of the bibliographic, the proofreading and inquiry into Ulysses and the corrected text.
Now, if you go through 130 pages of this line by line, I'm not a textual scholar.
Changes of dates, money, I don't know.
I mean, you look at how long this is.
What publication is it for publication?
This is the papers of the Bibliographical Society of America, like Kidd.
I mean, so you're going to have one.
He's going to write one back of me, another 200 pages, and then you're going to debate it.
That makes that a pretty interesting collectible item, then, doesn't it?
Oh, yeah.
All of these things are collectible.
And every stage.
And this is the Joyce Quarterly here.
This is what I edited since I was a kid.
Really?
For six years.
It's fun, you see.
He's edited all of it.
This is what I started when I was a kid, and it's a good journal.
I mean, it covers all kinds of things.
And we keep that going all the time.
And then we just started Joyce's studies.
But, you know, see, I write other, I mean, I've written books on literature and theology, Dorothy Richards, and do you know Jean Rhys, the Welsh writer, English writer?
Oh, yeah.
And I've been working on a lot of women writers, 20th century women novelists.
There's a book I did at Italian.
Where do you get the time to write all these books?
Oh, I used to get more time.
I don't anymore.
Of course, then I see I have full, I have full maps of every date.
that I give the students of Dublin, so we can trace every footstep that Bloom takes.
What do you do on Blues Day?
Well, I'll be in Monaco getting a paper this year, but we always try to get some kind of celebration.
Adrian Monier.
That was Solia Beach's partner.
Yes.
Across the way.
Well, now, here's what I think we ought to do.
You need to get to meet a lot of different people and see a lot of things, and then you ought to check with me.
How long are you here?
Two days.
So you're here tomorrow.
Right.
Then you probably want to see me tomorrow.
I'd like that.
Sure.
Could you have a few other areas?
Yeah, because then you'll know more what you want to cover.
Okay.
Well, I think that it's been a very, very useful introduction.
Well, I just thought that I would open up these things and then
Tomorrow, I have some time.
I'm giving a talk on Joyce and modernism to the modernist group here.
Tomorrow at noon, but I will be free early afternoon.
Great.
What, do you want to try two?
Whatever.
I haven't really studied Ray's... Ray, I think, will you tomorrow?
He gave me a schedule.
I just haven't had a chance to study it.
Let's see what exactly is going on.
How's he doing?
Yeah, my bed bigger is 230.
You're going to 4.
You know.
Boy, you're getting a full show, huh?
Yeah, I mean, I... Well, I want to see Cartland Lake, and I do want to... Yeah, I really think he's got you... Well, Howard told me this.
Howard Gottlieb.
You said I should talk to Cartland Lake.
Oh, no, you must talk to Lake.
This woman even must.
Yeah, you know, Sally Reed's a different one, sir.